Hello everyone and welcome
to the database overview lecture.
In this lecture you're gonna learn what are databases
and why use databases.
And after we answer those two fundamental questions,
we'll get a sense of where this course fits
in the realm of things.
So let's start off with a basic definition.
Databases are systems that allow users
to store and organise data.
And they're useful when dealing with large amounts of data.
So you might be wondering what do the typical users
look like who deal with databases.
Well databases actually have a wide variety of users.
These can include analysts such as a marketing analyst,
a business analyst or a sales or sales operation analyst;
or more technical people like data scientists,
software engineers, or web developers.
Basically anyone needing to deal with data
has a great use case to work with a database.
So since most users have some familiarity
with a spreadsheet software, either Google Spreadsheets
or Microsoft Excel, what we're gonna do is discuss
the transition from going from spreadsheets to databases.
So let's go ahead and discuss some use cases
for spreadsheets versus use cases for databases.
And then leverage that knowledge
to better understand databases.
So spreadsheets are really good for a one-time analysis
or to quickly need to chart something out,
such as an Excel.
And they work with reasonable data set sizes,
something that Excel and Google Spreadsheet
can open up really easily.
And what's really nice about spreadsheets is they
allow the ability for untrained people to work with data.
So anyone can just double click an Excel file,
and open it and work with it.
However, they do have downsides
where databases really shine.
Databases are really great for data integrity
meaning you don't want to have someone
be able to just click on a cell and change the data.
Databases don't really allow for that.
And they can also handle massive amounts of data.
Data sizes that would just basically make Excel
or Google Spreadsheets crash.
And they can also quickly combine different datasets
something that might be difficult to do for larger datasets
in a spreadsheet.
They also are perfect for automating steps for re-use
due to the sequel syntax, which we'll learn about later.
They can also support data for websites and applications.
So most websites and web applications,
or mobile applications, are linked to some sort of database
to store their data and retrieve their data.
So let's go ahead and leverage that knowledge
from spreadsheets to understand databases
and see the similarities between them.
So here we have a picture of a
looks like a normal spreadsheet.
Here we have the columns.
It's just a basic glucose-tracking spreadsheet.
And we have columns such as time, some measurements
et cetera, and various rows with different data points.
And then at the bottom here we have tabs
which are referencing various sheets
in the spreadsheet software.
Here we're using Excel.
So when we're transitioning from a spreadsheet
to a database, we can think of a database's tables
as the tabs of a spreadsheet.
So those tabs of a spreadsheet handles various types of data
or different rows in different columns.
Those tabs will translate to tables in a database.
So that a database is made up of many tables.
And then those tables are made up of rows and columns.
So the columns in the table of a database
is basically exactly what you would think
as a column in a spreadsheet.
It's just a vertical column that denotes
a certain data type.
So for instance the first one here we have time.
Second one we have measurements.
So columns in spreadsheets are basically the same
as columns in the table of a database.
And then the other feature we have from a spreadsheet
to a database is going to be rows.
And rows again behave exactly like you would expect them to
in a database table.
They're just the actual row of all that data
for a certain data point.
So in this case we're highlighting
the data points seven eight and nine,
and then all the measurements for those columns.
So again databases instead of tabs
they're gonna have tables, and those tables
are also gonna have rows and columns.
And you can basically just imagine them as spreadsheets,
just much larger that you can't individually click on.
Okay, so again we have columns, rows,
and instead of tabs we're gonna have tables.
So what are our database platform options?
Well, there's actually lots of database platform options.
A lot more than what I've put here,
but here are some of the main ones.
You have PostgreSQL.
You have things such as MySQL, and MS SQL Server Express,
Microsoft Access, and then SQLite.
Each of these has their pros and cons.
But were gonna be focusing on PostgreSQL.
The reason for this is because PostgreSQL is free,
it's open source, it's widely used on the internet,
it's multi platform so meaning if you have
various operating systems, like Windows or Mac users,
you can all use PostgreSQL.
And one of my main reasons for choosing it
is that it's super easy to instal
and just hit the ground running.
So PostgreSQL is a great database choice
for learning how to use SQL.
And SQL is a Structured Query Language,
which is what it stands for.
And it's what we're gonna learn in this course.
SQL is gonna be the way we communicate with our database.
It's the way we're gonna be able to communicate
with a database to get data out of it
or put data into it.
And the SQL learned in this course can be applied
to a variety of databases or SQL based software.
So we're not gonna pigeonhole ourselves to just PostgreSQL.
What you learn in this course, you're gonna be able
to apply it to a variety of databases
or software that uses SQL.
So for example of what a general SQL syntax would look like.
It would look something like this.
Select some column names from a table
and then you have some functions or clauses.
Here I'm ordering by the first name.
So we're gonna learn how to write and use SQL syntax
like this in this course.
So SQL is actually useful for a lot of things.
Everything I've listed here runs on some sort
of syntax of SQL.
So you have PostgreSQL or MySQL or Oracle Databases,
Microsoft Access, et cetera, the basic databases
you would think of that can use SQL.
But there's also a lot of software out there that uses SQL
as a way of interacting with their data, such as Looker,
or Periscope Data.
And there's also some abstractions that run on top
of big data systems, such as Hadoop.
You can use SQL with Hive or Google's BigQuery
or Facebook's Presto which is basically using SQL
to run on top of very large data systems
that use distributed data.
So SQL's gonna be incredibly useful
to operate a variety of tools and databases with.
So you're also gonna be notified if any of the SQL commands
we learned in this course are specific
to the PostgreSQL environment.
Most of the commands we learn are actually just gonna be
general SQL, so you won't get too many
of these notifications.
Basically everything you learn here, you're gonna
be able to apply directly to any conventional SQL database.
Okay, let's go ahead and review what we learned.
We learned what a database is,
why we should use a database.
We learned about the various SQL options.
And we also learned how to use SQL skills in this course
and how we're gonna be able to apply them
to many other software programmes.
Okay, with that being said, lets go ahead
and continue and learn some more.
Thanks everyone and I'll see you at the next lecture.